This document describes installing/upgrading R to use with
the DVN-DSB system; the current version of R is 2.6.1.


PLEASE NOTE: we very strongly recommend specifically using
the R version currently recommended by the DVN team. As of
now (Dec. 2007) it is 2.6.1. The DSB functionality relies on
a number of 3rd party R modules (UNF, Foreign, Zelig and
more) which in turn rely on further R modules. It has
definitely happened in the past that something in that
hierarchy would break when new versions of the main R
program come out. So now we carefully test all these
dependencies when new major versions are released and only
recommend uograding once all such problems are resolved. 
HOWEVER, we also strongly recommend to go ahead and upgrade
once the DVN/DSB team advises to do so. 

The upgrade process step by step. 

1. Obtain the right R rpm. You can get it from the official 
   CRAN site (http://http://cran.r-project.org/) or a
   mirror. If the version recommended by the DVN project is
   no longer on CRAN, please contact the DVN team for the 
   rpm. 
   It is important to get the rpm that matches your
   architecture. Most of the tasks performed by R are very 
   CPU-intensive. So if you have 64 bit hardware, you will 
   definitely observe significant performance gains by using 
   the native 64 bit version. 

   So, depending on your hardware, choose the right rpm: 

   R-2.6.1-x.x.i386.rpm or
   R-2.6.1-x.x.i686.rpm or
   R-2.6.1-x.x.x86_64.rpm or amd64, etc. 	

2. Install the rpm. 
   If you already have an older version installed, DO NOT
   upgrade! i.e., don't use rpm -U R...; instead, uninstall 
   the old version first: 

       rpm -e R
       
   then (important!) delete all the 3rd-party packages left
   over from the old installation: 

	rm -rf /usr/lib/R
   or
	rm -rf /usr/lib64/R 

   depending on the architecture; 

   then install the new rpm from scratch: 

	rpm -ivh R-2.6.1-x.x.xxx.rpm
 
   We are not done yet! 
   Now we need to obtain and rebuild all the 3rd-party
   modules. The DSB installation comes with a script that
   does that through the R's builtin mechanism for resolving
   such dependencies. 

3. Before we begin, however, make sure your system has all
   the necessary build components installed. ("building" R
   modules actually involve compiling binaries from
   sources!). 

   The following packages are available as RedHat rpms,
   however, they are not by default installed with the
   RedHat's standard "server" configuration, so make sure
   you obtain and install them: 

   
	tk-devel
	tcl-devel
	xorg-x11-devel
	libpng-devel
	gcc-g77	(yep, this is Fortran 77!)

   On a RedHat 4 system this can be done by running

	up2date tk-devel tcl-devel ... etc.

   Under RedHat 5 you have to do this utilizing the RH new
   yum framework. 

4. Now we are ready to download and build the modules: 

       cd /usr/local/VDC/R
       ./installR.sh

   This will produce a ton of debugging info (it is also
   saved in the file /tmp/RINSTALL.<PID>.LOG). 
   You are likely to see a few warning messages about the
   following packages at the end of the debugging output: 
   rgenoud, anchors and MCMCpack. These are OK to ignore!
   If however you see more warnings/errors, please report
   them to the DVN team. 

You should be ready now. Test your new R installation by
attempting to upload a new subsettable data file
(specifically, check if the UNF signatures have been
generated for the file and its variables) and running a
couple of simple data analysis jobs. 


TODO: note that while the installation of the R program
itself (first 2 steps) is rather simple and straighforward,
installing the 3rd-party dependencies is a fairly complex
process; it relies on software dependencies not listed in
the main R rpm and is prone to breaking between R releases,
etc. Even if it worked reliably, it is still a fairly
inefficient mechanism when you need to maintain a few
identical servers, as it involves having to compile the
modules on each of the systems (and having to replicate the
build environment with all the build dependencies installed
on each of them!). So it could be useful to invest some
effort into making this process simpler, by building and
packaging these required modules as rpms. We would still
need to build multiple, architecture-dependant rpms for
i686, x86_64, etc. (and, possibly, different rpms for
different RedHat versions we want to support?). But it could
still make things easier, specifically for our partners at
places like the Odum center.
